Microblogging is a new form of communication in which
users can describe their current status in short posts dis-
tributed by instant messages, mobile phones, email or the
Web. Twitter, a popular microblogging tool has seen a lot
of growth since it launched in October, 2006. In this paper,
we present our observations of the microblogging phenom-
ena by studying the topological and geographical properties
of Twitter’s social network. We find that people use mi-
croblogging to talk about their daily activities and to seek
or share information. Finally, we analyze the user intentions
associated at a community level and show how users with
similar intentions connect with each other.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
Search and Retrieval - Information Filtering; J.4 [Computer
Applications]: Social and Behavioral Sciences - Economics

General Terms
Social Network Analysis, User Intent, Microblogging, Social
Media

1. INTRODUCTION

Microblogging is a relatively new phenomenon defined as “a
form of blogging that lets you write brief text updates (usu-
ally less than 200 characters) about your life on the go and
send them to friends and interested observers via text mes-
saging, instant messaging (IM), email or the web.” 1. It is
provided by several services including Twitter2, Jaiku3 and
more recently Pownce4. These tools provide a light-weight,
easy form of communication that enables users to broadcast
and share information about their activities, opinions and
status. One of the popular microblogging platforms is Twit-
ter [29]. According to ComScore, within eight months of its
launch, Twitter had about 94,000 users as of April, 2007 [9].
Figure 1 shows a snapshot of the first author’s Twitter home-
page. Updates or posts are made by succinctly describing
one’s current status within a limit of 140 characters. Top-
ics range from daily life to current events, news stories, and
other interests. IM tools including Gtalk, Yahoo and MSN
have features that allow users to share their current status
with friends on their buddy lists. Microblogging tools facili-
tate easily sharing status messages either publicly or within
a social network.

Compared to regular blogging, microblogging fulfills a need
for an even faster mode of communication. By encourag-
ing shorter posts, it lowers users’ requirement of time and
thought investment for content generation. This is also one
of its main differentiating factors from blogging in general.
The second important difference is the frequency of update.
On average, a prolific bloger may update her blog once ev-
ery few days; on the other hand a microblogger may post
several updates in a single day.

With the recent popularity of Twitter and similar microblog-
ging systems, it is important to understand why and how
people use these tools. Understanding this will help us
evolve the microblogging idea and improve both microblog-
ging client and infrastructure software. We tackle this prob-
lem by studying the microblogging phenomena and analyz-
ing different types of user intentions in such systems.

Much of research in user intention detection has focused on
understanding the intent of a search queries. According to
Broder [5], the three main categories of search queries are
navigational, informational and transactional. Understand-
ing the intention for a search query is very different from
user intention for content creation. In a survey of bloggers,
Nardi et al. [26] describe different motivations for “why
we blog”. Their findings indicate that blogs are used as a
tool to share daily experiences, opinions and commentary.
Based on their interviews, they also describe how bloggers
form communities online that may support different social
groups in real world. Lento et al. [21] examined the im-
portance of social relationship in determining if users would
remain active in a blogging tool called Wallop. A user’s re-
tention and interest in blogging could be predicted by the
comments received and continued relationship with other
active members of the community. Users who are invited by
people with whom they share pre-exiting social relationships
tend to stay longer and active in the network. Moreover, cer-
tain communities were found to have a greater retention rate
due to existence of such relationships. Mutual awareness in
a social network has been found effective in discovering com-
munities [23].

In computational linguists, researchers have studied the prob-
lem of recognizing the communicative intentions that un-
derlie utterances in dialog systems and spoken language in-
terfaces. The foundations of this work go back to Austin
[2], Stawson [32] and Grice [14]. Grosz [15] and Allen [1]
carried out classic studies in analyzing the dialogues be-
tween people and between people and computers in coopera-
tive task oriented environments. More recently, Matsubara
[24] has applied intention recognition to improve the per-
formance of automobile-based spoken dialog system. While
their work focusses on the analysis of ongoing dialogs be-
tween two agents in a fairly well defined domain, studying
user intention in Web-based systems requires looking at both
the content and link structure.

In this paper, we describe how users have adopted a spe-
cific microblogging platform, Twitter. Microblogging is rel-
atively nascent, and to the best of our knowledge, no large
scale studies have been done on this form of communication
and information sharing. We study the topological and geo-
graphical structure of Twitter’s social network and attempt
to understand the user intentions and community structure
in microblogging. From our analysis, we find that the main
types of user intentions are: daily chatter, conversations,
sharing information and reporting news. Furthermore, users
play different roles of information source, friends or informa-
tion seeker in different communities.

The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we describe
the dataset and some of the properties of the underlying
social network of Twitter users. Section 3 provides an anal-
ysis of Twitter’s social network and its spread across geogra-
phies. Next, in Section 4 we describe aggregate user behav-
ior and community level user intentions. Section 5 provides
a taxonomy of user intentions. Finally, we summarize our
findings and conclude with Section 6.

2. DATASET DESCRIPTION

Twitter is currently one of the most popular microblogging
platforms. Users interact with this system by either using a
Web interface, IM agent or sending SMS updates. Members
may choose to make their updates public or available only to
friends. If user’s profile is made public, her updates appear
in a “public timeline” of recent updates. The dataset used
in this study was created by monitoring this public timeline
for a period of two months starting from April 01, 2007 to
May 30, 2007. A set of recent updates were fetched once
every 30 seconds. There are a total of 1,348,543 posts from
76,177 distinct users in this collection.

Twitter allows a user, A, to “follow” updates from other
members who are added as “friends”. An individual who is
not a friend of user A but “follows” her updates is known as
a “follower”. Thus friendships can either be reciprocated or
one-way. By using the Twitter developer API5, we fetched
the social network of all users. We construct a directed
graph G(V, E), where V represents a set of users and E
represents the set of “friend” relations. A directed edge e
exists between two users u and v if user u declares v as
a friend. There are a total of 87,897 distinct nodes with
829,053 friend relation between them. There are more nodes
in this graph due to the fact that some users discovered
though the link structure do not have any posts during the
duration in which the data was collected. For each user, we
also obtained their profile information and mapped their
location to a geographic coordinate, details of which are
provided in the following section.

3. MICROBLOGGING IN TWITTER

This section describes some of the characteristic properties
of Twitter’s Social Network including it’s network topology
and geographical distribution.

3.1 Growth of Twitter

Since Twitter provides a sequential user and post identifier,
we can estimate the growth rate of Twitter. Figure 2 shows
the growth rate for users and Figure 3 shows the growth rate
for posts in this collection. Since, we do not have access to
historical data, we can only observe its growth for a two
month time period. For each day we identify the maximum
value for the user identifier and post identifier as provided
by the Twitter API. By observing the change in these val-
ues, we can roughly estimate the growth of Twitter. It is
interesting to note that even though Twitter launched in
2006, it really became popular soon after it won the South
by SouthWest (SXSW) conference Web Awards6 in March,
2007. Figure 2 shows the initial growth in users as a result
of interest and publicity that Twitter generated at this con-
ference. After this period, the rate at which new users are
joining the network has slowed. Despite the slow down, the
number of new posts is constantly growing, approximately
doubling every month indicating a steady base of users gen-
erating content.