206
Harvard Educational Review  Vol. 86 No. 2 Summer 2016
Copyright © by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
Making Through the Lens of Culture 
and Power: Toward Transformative 
Visions for Educational Equity 
SHIRIN VOSSOUGHI
PAULA K. HOOPER
Northwestern University
MEG ESCUDÉ
Exploratorium.
In this essay, Shirin Vossoughi, Paula Hooper, and Meg Escudé advance a critique 
of branded, culturally normative definitions of making and caution against their 
uncritical adoption into the educational sphere. The authors argue that the ways 
making and equity are conceptualized can either restrict or expand the possibility that 
the growing maker movement will contribute to intellectually generative and libera-
tory educational experiences for working-class students and students of color. After 
reviewing various perspectives on making as educative practice, they present a frame-
work that treats the following principles as starting points for equity-oriented research 
and design: critical analyses of educational injustice; historicized approaches to mak-
ing as cross-cultural activity; explicit attention to pedagogical philosophies and prac-
tices; and ongoing inquiry into the sociopolitical values and purposes of making. 
These principles are grounded in their own research and teaching in the Tinkering 
Afterschool Program as well as in the insights and questions raised by critical voices 
both inside and outside the maker movement.
In an interview for The Atlantic entitled “All Immigrants Are Artists,” Haitian 
writer Edwidge Danticat (2013) ruminates on the forms of artistry and rein-
vention embodied in the everyday lives of immigrant families. Through the 
story of her mother, she describes the historical conditions that simultane-
ously necessitated and constrained creativity and locates her mother’s seam-
stressing in both material production and the quotidian beauty and dignity 
of survival: “If you can’t afford clothes, but you can make them—make them. 
207
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
You have to work with what you have, especially if you don’t have a lot of 
money. You use creativity, and you use imagination” (Danticat, 2013, para. 8). 
Significant in this essay, Danticat does not recast her mother as a maker or use 
the now-popularized language of making to legitimate her capabilities. Rather, 
through what she calls “the prism of art,” she locates her own work as a writer 
in a tradition that includes the ingenuity born of tight circumstances (McDer-
mott, 2010), an everyday practice that was both enmeshed in racialized and 
gendered hierarchies and provided dynamic resources for her development 
as an artist. 
Danticat’s revelations about her parents also invite us to recognize the skill 
and artistry demanded by the sociopolitical realities of migration, displace-
ment, and economic hardship. She writes, “I realize now I saw artistic quali-
ties in my parents’ choices—in their creativity, their steadfastness, the very 
fact that we were in this country from another place. They’re like the artist 
mentors people have in any discipline” (Danticat, 2013, para. 9). This egali-
tarian view of human creativity is reflected in Eglash’s (2004) introduction to 
Appropriating Technology, an edited volume that examines the role of the “lay 
public” in the production of scientific knowledge. Challenging the dominant 
view that those with greater social power produce technologies while those 
with less social power consume them, Eglash studies the ways communities 
reinvent and repurpose tools and artifacts, “often in ways that embody cri-
tique, resistance and outright revolt” (p. vii). Examples include the vernacu-
lar engineering of Latino car designers and the prevalence of environmental 
analysis among rural women. Grounded in distinct disciplines, both Danticat 
and Eglash “desettle” (Bang, Warren, Rosebery, & Medin, 2012) normative 
understandings of artistic and scientific ingenuity, particularly with regard to 
who we see as inventors, what we see as creativity, and on whose terms their ideas 
and practices are valued. 
We begin with these examples to intentionally challenge what is at risk of 
becoming a dominant view of making in the United States. In its most nar-
row, branded version, making is depicted as a uniquely American activity 
focused on technological forms of innovation that advance hands-on learning 
and contribute to the growth of the economy. This perspective is typified by a 
2011 TED Talk delivered by a prominent voice of the maker movement, Make 
Media founder and CEO Dale Dougherty. To illustrate how common it once 
was to think of oneself as a maker, Dougherty shares a vintage 1960 Chevrolet 
commercial entitled “American Maker.” The ad features two white boys build-
ing a sand castle with an American flag planted at the top (see images 1 and 
2). A male voice narrates: “Of all things Americans are, we are makers. With 
our strengths and our minds and spirit, we gather, we form, and we fashion. 
Makers and shapers and put-it-togetherers.” 
Dougherty (2011) elaborates, drawing a connection to the current maker 
movement by referencing the values he associates with the Chevrolet commer-
cial: “You know, it was a sense of pride, that we made things. That the world 
208
Harvard Educational Review
around us was made by us. It didn’t just exist. We made it.” He then shares 
the contemporary story of another (white, male) maker who is uninterested 
in school but gets involved in robotics competitions and eventually forms a 
company that builds robots for automobile factories. The historical forms of 
making Dougherty recognizes are grounded in gendered, white, middle-class 
cultural practices—a woman baking a pie, a grandfather making a ship in a 
bottle. And while Danticat describes how her mother became a great seam-
stress by making her family’s clothes at a lower cost, Dougherty characterizes 
makers as just “playing with technology . . . They don’t necessarily know what 
they’re doing or why they’re doing it.”
Mobilizing nostalgia for a bygone era, Dougherty also positions making as 
an exceptional element of American identity—one that has been lost over 
time. The image of the sandcastle with the flag, coupled with the notion that 
the world around us was “made by us,” extends this nostalgia to American 
hegemony, a time when US power and control were on the rise in the world, 
and to a time when Detroit (the site of the 2011 TED Talk) was character-
ized by economic growth rather than decline. Making, for Dougherty, is thus 
a means to reclaim and leverage American ingenuity toward the revitalization 
of American economic and political power. This is a specific, branded version 
of making that, much like the Chevrolet ad, is aimed at expanding markets 
and the profitability of companies like Maker Media (Buechley, 2013), which 
describes itself as a “a global platform for connecting Makers with each other, 
with products and services, and with our partners” (Maker Media, n.d.). 
From this vantage point, the mainstream discourse of making is also dis-
tinctly economic. Practices such as taking things apart, building new designs, 
and testing out solutions are valued in so far as they contribute to new tech-
nological and commercial innovations. For example, the White House (2015) 
states that it “has continued to support opportunities for students to learn 
about STEM through making, expand the resources available for maker entre-
preneurs, and foster the development of advanced manufacturing in the U.S.” 
Similarly, our review of references to the maker movement in the New York 
Times, Los Angeles Times, San Francisco Chronicle, and Huffington Post revealed 
that, with a few notable exceptions, the majority of articles focused on a nar-
row set of actors (Maker Media, TechShop, Silicon Valley startups) and the 
expensive tools and projects (3D printers, robotics, drones) associated with 
makerspaces.1 The forms of ingenuity present in communities that are not 
benefiting from dominant economic structures—such as material repair and 
trade, hacking, making as social or artistic practice, and economic survival—
are deemphasized. The broader purpose of making, according to this dis-
course, is to cultivate and harness individual capabilities that will ultimately 
contribute to corporate agendas and strengthen existing economic structures. 
The ideological distance among the narratives presented by Dougherty, 
Danticat, and Eglash sets up the central problem we seek to examine in this 
209
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
Image 1. Title screen of film titled “American Maker, Presented by Chevrolet.”
 
Image 2. Two white boys building a sand castle.
210
Harvard Educational Review
article: the tensions and possibilities for equity-oriented education within the 
current maker movement and the ways we might reconceptualize making as a 
pedagogical practice that is grounded in the histories, needs, assets, and expe-
riences of working-class students and students of color.
The Maker Movement
As a self-defined grassroots movement of backyard and kitchen tinkerers, hack-
ers, designers, and inventors, the maker movement includes a range of perspec-
tives on the definitions and purposes of making. As reflected in Dougherty’s 
talk, corporate and governmental entities (MAKE Media, Maker Faires, the 
White House, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Chevron, etc.) 
often advance a branded version of making, first as an economic enterprise 
and second as an educational endeavor. There is also a growing number of 
makers, educators, and researchers who self-identify with the movement and 
leverage the resources opened up by the first group to advance various edu-
cational agendas, such as engaging young people in personally compelling, 
creative investigations of the material and social worlds (Brahms, 2014; Marti-
nez & Stager, 2013); democratizing access to the tools, skills, and discourses of 
power previously available only to experts (Blikstein, 2013; Halverson & Sher-
idan, 2014); and expanding participation in STEM fields through interest- 
driven, multidisciplinary learning environments (Martin, 2015). Finally, there 
are educators and researchers who engage in making and related practices 
but, for various reasons, are critical of the broader movement and are some-
times reluctant to identify with it. 
We position ourselves with the third group and seek to examine critiques of 
the maker movement in order to begin articulating an alternative conceptual 
and pedagogical framework. In so doing, we aim to be mindful of the hetero-
geneity within and across these groups while identifying the dangers present 
in the uncritical adoption of branded versions of making, particularly with 
regard to their implications for educational equity. We also intentionally reach 
outside the movement to bring in alternative voices, like Danticat and Eglash, 
who articulate critiques we see as germane to our argument.
We begin by describing how making has been conceptualized across these 
various actors, foregrounding popular critiques from a range of economic, 
pedagogical, and feminist perspectives. We then consider how equity has been 
conceptualized in the context of the maker movement and to what extent it 
connects to existing research on the role of race, culture, epistemology, and 
power in learning. This discussion carries over to the final section, where we 
elaborate the alternative principles we believe need to be engaged by educa-
tors, researchers, and policy makers if the current movement is to meaningfully 
confront and transform— rather than reproduce—educational inequities.
As researchers and educators, we are engaged in making programs with 
young people from economically and racially marginalized communities in 
211
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
the United States. More broadly, we locate ourselves in research on culture 
and learning that is explicitly aimed at social and educational transformation 
(Bang & Medin, 2010; Gutiérrez, 2008; Nasir, Rosebery, Warren, & Lee, 2006). 
With this article, we intend to raise issues that we see missing from the litera-
ture on making and to pose the questions we hope to pursue, with others, to 
help construct transformative visions for educational equity. Ultimately, we 
argue that the ways making and equity are conceptualized can either restrict 
or expand the possibility that this movement will contribute to intellectually 
generative and liberatory pedagogical practices for working-class students and 
students of color.
Conceptualizations of Making and the Maker Movement
Martin (2015) traces the maker movement to the founding of Make magazine 
in 2005 and the first Maker Faire in 2006, maintaining that “the basic activity 
of making grows out of longstanding hobbies and crafts such as woodwork-
ing, sewing, and electronics” (p. 30). For Halverson and Sheridan (2014), the 
construction of physical objects and the ways people increasingly share their 
processes and products in both physical and digital forums make the move-
ment distinct from earlier computational and Internet revolutions. Honey 
and Kanter (2013) define making as “building or adapting objects by hand, 
for the simple pleasure of figuring out how things work” (p. 4). This view 
of making as an essential human need and capacity is reflected in popular 
media. As Alison Arieff (2015) writes in a New York Times editorial entitled 
“Learning Through Tinkering,” “I’m a huge fan of modern conveniences. But 
as we’ve become so disconnected from where things come from, from the 
knowledge, resources and effort required to fulfill even the most basic needs, 
I believe we’ve lost something essential (if intangible).” Arieff begins the piece 
by describing a unit her daughter’s third-grade class was studying on “pio-
neers,” through which the class learned about self-sufficiency and resilience. 
Here, it is important to note that Arieff does not address the settler-colonial 
dimensions (Calderon, 2014) of pioneer practices and identities; nor does 
she unpack who “we” refers to in statements such as “we’ve become so dis-
connected from where things come from.” In other words, the essay assumes 
the universality of European-American middle- and upper-class experiences, a 
standpoint from which to reconnect to working with one’s hands. 
There is historical precedent for such assumptions and forms of erasure. 
The early twentieth-century Arts and Crafts movement and associated progres-
sive reforms in education were similar reactions to the Industrial Revolution 
and textbook-centric curriculum. This largely European and North American 
artistic movement was critical of mechanized, factory-based production and 
advocated for a return to traditional craftsmanship. Similarly, progressive edu-
cators of the time, such as John Dewey, sought to cultivate communal forms 
of pedagogical activity that connected the hand and the mind. As Rose (2014) 
212
Harvard Educational Review
notes, “Our discovery of making and tinkering is a rediscovery, one that seems 
to emerge in reaction to social and economic trends that leave Americans 
yearning to use their hands” (p. xxiv). While Rose appreciates the maker 
movement’s attention to the cognitive skill and content of physical work, he 
also describes the resurgence of making as a “middle-class movement”: 
Working-class folk have not had the luxury of discovering making and tinkering; 
they’ve been doing it all their lives to survive—and creating exchange networks 
to facilitate it. Somebody across the street or down the road is a mechanic, or is 
wise about home remedies, or does tile work, and you can swap your own skills 
and services for that expertise (p. xxv).2 
Barton, Tan, and Greenberg (in press) similarly describe the movement 
as an “adult white, middle-class pursuit” shaped by leisure time and eco-
nomic resources. Further, while making was a core part of vocational educa-
tion throughout the twentieth century, it “never carried the status or buzz it 
does now that it is more the domain of middle class kids—and includes sexy 
digital technology” (Rose, 2014, p. xxv). We agree with these critiques and 
believe they raise larger questions about the modes of inclusion practiced by 
the maker movement—which often reach out to and invite in participants 
who may have a very different historical and economic relationship to making 
and working with one’s hands. In the process, working-class communities of 
color are once again positioned as targets of intervention rather than sources 
of deep knowledge and skill, and dominant communities are reinscribed as 
being ahead, with something to teach or offer rather than something to learn. 
We are also concerned that the movement may be more aligned with cor-
porate values than social change. Writing in the New Yorker, journalist Evgeny 
Morozov (2014) questions the faith such movements place in craftsmanship, 
“back-to-the-land sloganeering,” (para. 4) and “making” to reorganize labor 
and economic production without adequately attending to the need for insti-
tutional and political change. Thus, while the maker movement is often char-
acterized as anticonsumerist (Dougherty, 2012), Morozov (2014) laments its 
close relationship with powerful business and military interests, such as the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), adding, “Makers, it 
appears, are not necessarily trouble makers.” Indeed, antiestablishment brand-
ing is often coupled with the impetus to purchase a new set of products (from 
3D printers to making kits) and may serve to mask conventional corporate 
agendas and forms of profit making. In her essay “Why I Am Not a Maker,” 
Chachra (2015) expresses a similar perspective on the hierarchies reproduced 
by the maker movement: “Making is not a rebel movement, scrappy individu-
als going up against the system . . . it mostly re-inscribes familiar values, in 
slightly different form: that artifacts are important, and people are not.”
Chachra (2015) also juxtaposes the kinds of human activity that tend to be 
valued by the movement with the everyday practices that have been the his-
torical domain of women: mending, repairing, teaching, and caregiving. The 
213
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
success of the movement means that these practices are cast as less valuable or 
that they must be reframed as making in order to be legitimized: “Describing 
oneself as a maker—regardless of what one actually or mostly does—is a way 
of accruing to oneself the gendered, capitalist benefits of being a person who 
makes products.” Her critique of the pressure to identify as a maker exempli-
fies the views of those who are engaged in practices of engineering, design, 
and education but who choose to dis-identify with the broader movement so 
as not to be subsumed by its (patriarchal and capitalist) values. 
These arguments highlight the normatively valued forms of learning and 
creativity that have been both challenged and reproduced by the maker move-
ment. Thus, while a number of researchers celebrate the range of identities, 
practices, and learning environments made available through making, less 
attention has been paid to the measures of valuable human and educational 
activity reproduced by the movement in its current form and their conse-
quences for equity-oriented pedagogy and research. While the branded ver-
sion of making is not the only strand, it often functions as the starting point 
that other definitions must answer to, particularly with regard to securing 
funding for educational programs and related research projects. We explore 
the alternative starting points that might shape how we define and study mak-
ing through a wider set of cultural histories, values, and epistemologies. 
Making and Educational Equity
Largely in response to critiques of narrow representations of making, ques-
tions of diversity and equity are increasingly at the forefront of making dis-
course. As Halverson and Sheridan (2014) argue, making as an educative 
practice has the potential to help transform what counts as learning and legit-
imate “a broader range of identities, practices and environments,” a shift they 
describe as “a bold step toward equity in education” (p. 503). 
We agree that there is a need to transform what counts as learning and 
that making can play an important role in this expansion. However, we ques-
tion the idea that the maker movement—and specifically its forays into the 
educational sphere—has, thus far, represented a bold step toward equity. As 
Barton, Tan, and Greenberg (in press) note, makerspaces that have reached 
beyond dominant populations “are the exception and not the norm,” with 
“little research documenting what is working, how or why” (p. 30). 
Further, current conceptualizations of making and equity have not ade-
quately wrestled with the cultural, political, and economic tensions and con-
tradictions reflected across the narratives introduced above, leading at times 
to the reproduction of historical inequities. For example, Dougherty’s TED 
Talk posits the need to reimagine schools to look more like the robotics com-
petitions that inspire children like the young maker in Detroit. This image of 
the white, male student whose interests and talents are marginalized in school 
can be seen as the original imagined audience of the movement’s educational 
214
Harvard Educational Review
designs—one that many have since sought to diversify (Buechley, 2013). Yet, 
the fact that a progressive educational movement born in the twenty-first cen-
tury begins from a narrow set of cultural experiences, and has since sought to 
expand “diversity” and “inclusion” from that center point, exemplifies one of 
the central tensions we seek to problematize. 
To elaborate, educational programs animated by “access” and “inclusion”—
what Gutiérrez and Jaramillo (2006) refer to as the “sameness as fairness” 
approach—tend to design making activities and environments with seemingly 
neutral or universal learning goals that are implicitly rooted in the experi-
ences of dominant populations (such as frequent Maker Faire or museum par-
ticipants). This process of design is typically followed by efforts to expand 
participation, thereby limiting equity to outreach and diversified participation 
rather than the critical examination and potential reorganization of the activi-
ties and pedagogies themselves. 
Further, while animated by equity concerns, questions such as “Who has 
access to making?” fail to examine the assumptions that already inform the 
ways the question is framed. This question implies that making writ large is 
synonymous with the ways it is defined in the current maker movement and 
that this form of making is a historically novel and inherently desirable activity 
that should be practiced by all students and communities. Spurred by efforts 
to delineate and market an emerging field, these assumptions align with an 
interest in setting making apart from other forms of creative human activity. 
Indeed, we have witnessed a number of conversations among researchers and 
educators working to demarcate “what counts” as making or tinkering. While 
these conversations represent efforts to develop a more precise definition of 
making, the problem emerges when we fail to consider definitions that are 
rooted in distinct historical and cultural genealogies or to attend to whose 
voices are absent in the room. This inattention makes it difficult to recog-
nize the cultural and socioeconomic assumptions already embedded in seem-
ingly neutral making activities (such as 3D-printed catapults or night-launch 
rockets). We also worry that this approach overlooks the tensions of assimila-
tion and cultural self-denial consistently navigated by working-class youth and 
youth of color and positions those who identify with the maker movement as 
privileged cultural and intellectual gatekeepers.
In grappling with definitions of making, the research literature often ref-
erences Buechley’s (2013) analysis of the narrow representations within Make 
magazine across the first nine years and 39 issues of its publication (2005–
2014): 85 percent of the magazine covers featured white boys and men, with a 
focus on robotics, electronics, and vehicles. While the response to this water-
shed critique has led to a greater focus on representation (e.g., expanding the 
diversity of makers featured on the magazine cover), less attention has been 
given to the call for interrogating what is recognized as making. This tension is 
akin to earlier trends in multicultural education, where nondominant cultural 
practices were incorporated in tokenized ways (through food and holidays or 
215
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
the incorporation of nonwhite characters in children’s books) as opposed to 
the reorganization of learning based on deeper understandings of students’ 
repertoires of practice, such as community-based forms of storytelling or sci-
entific inquiry (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; Medin & Bang, 2014). Thus, we 
argue that close attention to who students are—and what they experience as 
cultural, historical, and political actors—alters and shapes the pedagogical 
design and practice of making in consequential ways. 
Alternative Visions: Toward the Critical Theory, Practice,  
and Research of Making
Building on these critiques, how might we reconceptualize the educational 
practice of making in ways that place equity at the center? We argue that an 
equity-oriented approach to making treats the following principles as starting 
points for research and design: critical analyses of educational injustice, his-
toricized approaches to making as cross-cultural activity, explicit attention to 
pedagogical philosophies and practices, and ongoing inquiry into the socio-
political values and purposes of making. We ground this framework in our 
own research and teaching in the Tinkering Afterschool Program3 (Vossoughi, 
Escudé, Kong & Hooper, 2013) as well as in the emerging interventions and 
debates among critical voices within the maker movement. We highlight exam-
ples that illustrate the educational possibilities and forms of liberatory practice 
that can emerge when key learning goals and values are explicitly conceptual-
ized through the lens of culture and power.
Critical Analyses of Educational Injustice 
We work from the premise that equity-oriented design and research must 
begin with a clear analysis of educational injustices and how they shape the 
lived experiences and pedagogical needs of young people and their commu-
nities.4 While discourses of equity in making are often characterized by terms 
like “diversity,” “access,” “inclusion,” and “opportunity,” there is seldom sus-
tained attention to racialization, discipline, and the school-to-prison pipe-
line (Elias, 2013; Nasir, 2011); to deficit thinking as tied to tracking (Oakes, 
1999) and narrow forms of remediation (Cole & Griffin, 1983); to curricular 
and pedagogical models that marginalize the cultural practices of students 
(González, Moll, & Amanti, 2005); or to the disproportionate impact of high-
stakes testing on working-class students and students of color (Rose, 2011). 
In our view, efforts to broaden participation without explicit analysis of such 
injustices advance the implicit arguments that access to normative making and 
STEM learning opportunities is sufficient for bringing about equity, and that 
equity looks like individual success within the current system (e.g., increasing 
the number of underrepresented students in the STEM pipeline), rather than 
the collective reimagining and transformation of the system itself. 
216
Harvard Educational Review
How and why are explicit analyses of educational injustice necessary for 
developing more equitable forms of making? First, like Morozov, we are con-
cerned that a focus on new learning tools and activities without attention 
to corresponding structural changes will reproduce existing inequities. For 
example, our work with educators has led us to recognize the crucial role of 
guided reflection as a core element of robust professional development. Writ-
ing and talking about the pedagogical details of moment-to-moment inter-
actions with students often surfaces deficit-oriented assumptions and creates 
the space to codevelop more equitable practices. Yet, this time for reflection 
is hard to come by and is systematically underfunded, particularly in schools 
and communities hardest hit by budget cuts and other forms of economic dis-
investment. A similar tension emerges when inquiry-based forms of learning 
come up against accountability measures that limit the room for alternative 
pedagogies in schools and increasingly constrain curriculum in afterschool 
settings (Nocon & Cole, 2006). From this vantage point, high-quality mak-
ing activities and tools alone will not unsettle existing inequities if we do not 
simultaneously challenge disinvestments in public education and call for the 
structural changes that would meaningfully support all teachers and students. 
Failing to name these inequities can lead to educational designs that can only 
be incorporated by well-resourced schools and programs. 
Second, advancing making as an alternative to standardized, test-centric 
education without also confronting discourses of failure, persistence, and grit 
risks replicating deficit views of students. For example, researchers and edu-
cators often highlight the ways making can support the process of learning by 
encouraging intellectual risk taking and iteration. This includes reframing 
frustration and failure as fundamental to the recursive feedback that charac-
terizes making, rather than as problems to be avoided in the search for one 
right answer (Blikstein, 2013; Petrich, Wilkinson, & Bevan, 2013). There is a 
shared value here around the ways students iterate by studying the actions and 
movements of their creations (Martin, 2015) and imagining how things could 
be beyond how they are (Ackermann, 2010). In the Tinkering Afterschool 
Program, educators often presented imperfect examples (a faulty scribbling 
machine or a sewn science notebook that artfully incorporated a “mistake”) 
as a way to model the power of process, invite students to publicly discuss how 
they might approach a problem, and emphasize the importance of ideas over 
final products. Such principles hold great potential for widening narrow defi-
nitions of success or intelligence (Vossoughi et al., 2013). However, Martinez 
and Stager (2013) caution against confusing “iteration with failure when in 
fact any iterative design cycle is about continuous improvement, keeping what 
works, and improving what doesn’t.” They argue, “This is learning, not fail-
ure” (p. 70). Because, as Martin (2015) notes, some students and schools have 
been systematically labeled as “failures,” the term (legitimately) carries nega-
tive connotations and may not be so easily reframed (Ryoo, Bulalacao, Kekelis, 
McLeod, & Henriquez, 2015). 
217
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
We also question the ways terms like “persistence” or “grit” are used to 
frame desired responses to frustration within making experiences. These dis-
courses tend to individualize historical inequities and omit other crucial fac-
tors, such as the quality and meaning of the task itself, the presence or absence 
of intellectual safety, or the kinds of cultural differences and microaggressions 
students may be navigating within a making environment (Kohn, 2014; Norris, 
2014). As educators, if our response to frustration is always “persist,” we forfeit 
the opportunity to interpret these moments as an indication of what needs 
pedagogical attention or curricular change. The broader context of educa-
tional injustice, therefore, has consequences for how practices such as itera-
tion are conceptualized and mediated. 
Finally, explicit attention to educational injustices is essential to developing 
a pedagogical sensitivity to the ways they can reemerge within making environ-
ments. For example, we have observed that making activities are sometimes 
framed as rewards for good behavior, thereby reconstituting the practices asso-
ciated with ability grouping and tracking. In the Tinkering Afterschool Pro-
gram, we experienced a turning point when our research surfaced the ways 
a student who was perceived as “off task” was receiving narrow forms of assis-
tance and few opportunities for authorship as compared to other students. 
Examining this dynamic allowed us to develop more responsive and respect-
ful approaches to working with this student and others. Thus, despite equity- 
oriented goals, deficit ideologies are often tenacious and fluid, demanding 
ongoing reflection and action. 
Questions that can support educators and researchers in identifying such 
inequities might include: Who has access to more intellectually complex activ-
ity within this space? Are there gendered or racialized patterns of tool use, 
participation, or assistance? Are multiple pathways and ways of knowing sup-
ported or marginalized? What kinds of mentorship are available to help youth 
navigate everyday encounters with racism and other forms of marginaliza-
tion? And if and how do making environments attend to the histories of prac-
tice young people are involved in? These questions exemplify the alternative 
approaches to design and pedagogy that grow from the explicit analysis of 
educational injustice. 
A Historicized Approach to Making as Cross-Cultural Activity 
Medin and Bang (2014) problematize the ways “science education recognizes 
and values practices that white, middle-class scholars bring to the classroom, 
while ignoring or even overtly discouraging the science-related practices” of 
other cultural groups (p. 240). They argue that equity in science education 
will not be achieved as long as science itself remains “pure and beyond exami-
nation” (p. 240). Here we consider the implications of this argument for the 
maker movement and argue that equity will not be achieved as long as our 
definitions of making remain “pure and beyond examination.” 
In this spirit, we ask, what does a historicized view of making as cross-cultural 
218
Harvard Educational Review
activity open up with regard to design, pedagogy, and research? First, rather 
than beginning with the question of who has access to making, we might start 
with the assumption that practices resonant with making are already present 
in diverse forms in all communities. As Gutiérrez argues, “Inventing, mak-
ing, tinkering, designing, are indigenous practices, that is, practices that origi-
nate and occur naturally in particular ecologies” (Schwartz & Gutiérrez, 2015, 
p. 577). Rather than working to “bring” making to nondominant communi-
ties, this assumption of human ingenuity (McDermott & Raley, 2011) positions 
researchers and educators as learners, inquiring into the ways of asking, know-
ing, and relating involved in existing forms of making. Drawing on our earlier 
discussion of Danticat and Eglash, such inquiries might also involve noticing 
how extant making practices are rooted in community-based forms of surviv-
ing and thriving. 
Second, this approach can help reframe how we understand who is and who 
is not participating in spaces such as Maker Faires. While discourses of equity 
in the maker movement often focus on diversifying participation, less atten-
tion has been given to the reasons people choose not to participate in particu-
lar spaces and how those reasons may be rooted in critique. If we suspend the 
assumption that participating in sanctioned makerspaces is inherently desir-
able, we may open ourselves up to recognizing and learning from the com-
munities of creative practice people already participate in and to troubling 
simplified discourses of interest and engagement. These discourses often posi-
tion particular populations as interest deficient rather than asking after the 
environments themselves and seeking to understand people’s subjective expe-
riences and critiques (Nasir & Vakil, in press). 
This view does not preclude considering how young people’s interest-driven 
activities connect to robust educational or professional pathways (Ito et al., 
2013). Indeed, a number of scholars illustrate both the intellectual depth of 
everyday linguistic and cultural practices and how these can be meaningfully 
connected to academic concepts and identities (Gutiérrez, 2008; Lee, 2001). 
This includes supporting students in appropriating the tools of power toward 
new ends. Within making environments, this perspective can inform the mate-
rials, tools, and activities selected, as well as the ways teachers talk about making 
activities and identities. For example, creating environments that model and 
invite students to share stories about familiar practices (such as the intergen-
erational use of sewing machines, kite making, and home electronics repair) 
can support new ways of noticing the scientific and artistic dimensions of their 
everyday activity (Vossoughi et al., 2013), making connections to as well as 
expanding disciplinary knowledge, and recognizing the intellectual complex-
ity of historically gendered practices such as sewing (Kafai, Searle, Martinez, & 
Brayboy, 2014). As Buechley, Eisenberg, Catchen, and Crockett (2008) argue: 
In addition to asking “how can we get girls and women to participate in tradi-
tional computer science and support them once they are there?”, we should ask: 
219
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
“how can we integrate computer science with activities and communities that 
girls and women are already engaged in?” (p. 431) 
Such questions shift the discourse away from deficit orientations (Why are 
girls less interested in computer science?) and toward epistemological frame-
works that begin with what is significant to students. 
Thus, approaching design in ways that build on and expand everyday prac-
tices is quite distinct from designing activities based on dominant cultural 
norms and then working to broaden participation. This shift becomes particu-
larly essential as the maker movement expands into schools and develops its 
own forms of assessment. The field is poised to define what counts as learning 
in the context of making. Situating these efforts in a deep understanding of 
learning as cultural activity will be crucial to challenging rather than repro-
ducing deficit ideologies. 
Finally, efforts to draw borders around making set up making itself as the 
goal of educational practice, rather than treating making as one among many 
tools that can productively intersect with other rich forms of learning. Nar-
row definitions of making also demarcate which educational environments are 
considered makerspaces (and can therefore access related sources of funding) 
as well as who counts as a maker and who does not. From our perspective, this 
trend is not inevitable and could be reorganized in productive ways by inten-
tionally treating the practice of making as open to local adaptation, critique, 
and appropriation. This shift also requires a clear understanding of the role of 
the teacher in making environments. 
Explicit Attention to Pedagogy
A growing number of studies describe the pedagogical skills that support 
making, including knowledge of materials, tools, and processes; strategies 
for supporting meaning making and the complexification of ideas; and an 
understanding of participants’ prior knowledge and interests (Brahms, 2014; 
Gutwill, Hido, & Sindorf, 2015). Petrich et al. (2013) note the importance 
of providing opportunities for teachers to experience activities and tools as 
learners prior to and alongside engaging young people in making activities. 
Critiquing approaches to technology that treat “computers and software as 
black boxes where the inner workings are hidden to users” (Kafai, Fields, & 
Searle, 2014), the research literature also highlights the transparency of mate-
rials and activities as a core pedagogical value (Peppler, 2013). 
While there is increasing attention to the role of facilitation and transpar-
ency across studies of making, we have also noticed significant limitations in 
the analysis of pedagogy as it relates to discussions of equity. First, empirical 
studies of learning in the context of making tend to foreground individual 
learning processes rather than joint activity or explicit analyses of teaching 
(Vossoughi & Bevan, 2014). This tendency suggests that pedagogical struc-
tures were either absent or minimal or resulted from a methodological and 
220
Harvard Educational Review
conceptual decision to minimize explicit attention to pedagogy, even if it was a 
significant part of the learning process. When educators are mentioned, they 
are consistently framed as “facilitators,” “guides,” or “coaches,” a discourse 
that tends to treat the word “teacher” and the practices associated with being 
a teacher as inherently didactic or problematic. 
We worry that an overreliance on child-centered pedagogies that empha-
size the avoidance of direct assistance overlooks the powerful role intentional 
teaching can play in challenging deficit ideologies and cultivating substantive 
experiences of intellectual dignity (Espinoza & Vossoughi, 2014) as well as the 
need to make pedagogical structures visible within research, design, and pro-
fessional development. To illustrate this point, we have crafted two different 
accounts of the same interaction captured during our video-based research on 
afterschool tinkering. The first vignette describes the experience of one stu-
dent as he explored circuitry. 
Vignette 1. Circuit Boards: Individual Learning Processes 
Arthur (seven years old) was exploring circuitry using a series of blocks with 
electrical components.5 He became excited when he realized that some of his 
lights were lit even though they weren’t directly connected to the battery, and he 
called others over to point out that some lights worked “without even batteries.” 
He then became fascinated with a battery tester that was available on the table 
and took a break from his circuit building in order to test all his batteries. After 
this detour, he periodically switched off his circuits and spoke about the need to 
save their energy. 
Arthur then decided to move around the room to check out the work of oth-
ers. He spent some time as a guest at Aeden’s (nine years old) circuit. Aeden 
pointed out interesting aspects of his own circuit boards (such as a small fan with 
rapidly spinning foam blades), and Arthur joined in the investigation. Aeden’s 
own engagement with circuits seemed to ebb and flow on this day.
Arthur then added more boards to his original parallel circuit. When he added 
a particular motor, he noticed that it affected the intensity of light from some 
of the lightbulbs. This threw Arthur into his final investigation of the effects his 
circuit boards were having on one another. 
This episode reflects forms of observing and reporting on learning that 
we have noticed in various introductions to making, including at conferences 
where making is featured, such as FabLearn, Association of Science and Tech-
nology Centers (ASTC), and Digital Media and Learning. Here participants’ 
individual investigations and learning outcomes are foregrounded alongside 
attention to peer interaction and collaboration. Such accounts highlight the 
forms of inquiry and thinking evident within the process of making, thus 
creating new resources for activity design and formative assessment. These 
include the ways authentic questions and investigations emerge through direct 
engagement with materials and scientific phenomena and the ways knowledge 
about the workings of electricity become consequential to achieving purposes 
221
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
that are authored by participants themselves (Blikstein, 2013; Peppler, 2013). 
Compare this version of the story with the following vignette, which highlights 
Arthur’s interactions with a teacher in the setting: 
Vignette 2. Joint Activity 
Arthur worked with Walter (a teacher) to explore circuitry. Arthur became 
excited when he realized that some of his lights were lit even though they weren’t 
directly connected to the battery. He then called others over to point out that 
some lights worked “without even batteries.” Using Arthur’s own phrasing, Wal-
ter affirmed and then reframed this statement, helping to clarify what was hap-
pening: “without even batteries going directly to those light bulbs.” 
Arthur then asked Walter about a battery tester that was available on the table. 
After Walter explained the uses of the tool, Arthur became fascinated and took 
a break from his circuit building in order to test all his batteries. Following this 
detour, he periodically switched off his circuits and spoke about the need to save 
their energy. 
Arthur then decided to move around the room to check out the work of oth-
ers, a practice that is encouraged in the setting. He spent some time as a guest at 
Aeden’s circuit. Aeden pointed out interesting aspects of his own investigations, 
and Arthur joined in the experiment. Aeden’s own engagement with circuits 
seemed to ebb and flow on this day, which the staff later discussed as poten-
tially stemming from his need for a greater challenge. During the end-of-the-day 
debrief, one staff member committed to working more closely with Aeden the 
following week.
Arthur then added more boards to his original parallel circuit. Walter com-
mented that Arthur had built an “elegant circuit” and offered suggestions for 
ways to test and try out solutions. Some of Arthur’s solutions surprised Walter, 
who said that he was also learning from Arthur’s ideas. When a particular motor 
was added, Walter pointed out that it was affecting the intensity of light from 
some of the light bulbs. This threw Arthur into his final investigation of the 
effects his circuit boards were having on one another other.6
In contrast to Vignette 1, the unit of analysis in Vignette 2 is one of joint 
activity. While similarly highlighting the ideas that emerged within Arthur’s 
investigations, this lens treats thinking as a social activity, one that is intention-
ally mediated through the teacher’s interventions. Here, explicit attention to 
pedagogy foregrounds the generative role of elders and mentors in young 
people’s development, makes the art and skill of teaching transparent and 
available for other educators, and treats the development of social relation-
ships as a primary rather than secondary aspect of making activity (DiGiacomo 
& Gutiérrez, 2015). 
This lens allows us to consider the making of social relations as interwoven 
with the making of artifacts. However, we see this distinction as one that must 
be carefully developed and documented rather than taken for granted as an 
innate feature of making environments. Actions such as Arthur’s decision to 
walk around and check out other students’ circuits or the brotherly stance 
222
Harvard Educational Review
Aeden took with regard to Arthur’s curiosity about his circuit have a history. 
We might study this history by asking, If and how is collaboration encour-
aged and modeled in this setting? How did students interact with one anoth-
er’s projects early in their participation as compared to later points in their 
trajectory? Such detailed accounts of the process through which alternative 
social relations come to be would help illustrate how knowledge and assistance 
become readily accessible to all participants as well as the ways competitive 
interactions (those more likely to reproduce raced/classed/gendered hier-
archies of intelligence) can be altered and reimagined. As Nasir et al. (2006) 
argue, a deep sense of social belonging is a key marker of equitable learning 
environments. 
Also, we worry that discussions of transparency within making tend to focus 
on the transparency of activity design (such as the use of materials that make 
scientific phenomena or engineering solutions visible and investigable) rather 
than on the complementary forms of transparency afforded through peda-
gogical talk and apprenticeship. Arthur’s fascination with the battery tester, 
for example, emerged from Walter’s explanation of how it works—a move that 
made the teacher’s knowledge of the tool available for Arthur to draw on in 
his investigation. Furthermore, Walter’s decision to encourage what could be 
seen as off-task behavior was intentional and tied to his knowledge of how this 
added expertise could deepen Arthur’s learning, as well as to his rejection of 
pedagogies that emphasize behavior control. 
Yet, the tendency to focus on the transparency of tools rather than ped-
agogy suggests that high-quality making activities will themselves serve as the 
teacher within a process of self-directed learning. In our view, self-directed 
learning can easily slip into a meritocratic, pull-yourself-up-by-your-bootstraps 
approach to education. In this case, Arthur’s journey through the activity can 
largely be seen as successful. Thus, the descriptions in Vignette 1 are framed 
in ways that attribute this success to Arthur. However, had Arthur had a diffi-
cult time with the activity (as was sometimes the case), the focus on his individ-
ual learning process could easily turn into a story of Arthur’s struggles rather 
than an examination of the pedagogical supports and relationships available 
in the environment. The contrasting depictions of Aeden’s experience across 
the two vignettes reflect this tension. In Vignette 2, moments of disengage-
ment are attributed to the lack of support Aeden received from educators 
that day. The staff interprets Aeden’s response as a reflection of his need for 
a greater challenge, and they commit to working with him more intentionally. 
Thus, empirical analyses that foreground teaching can make visible the spe-
cific forms of reflection and pedagogical responsibility necessary for equitable 
teaching. The analytic focus in the making literature on activity design over 
and above pedagogical design also resonates with Chachra’s (2015) critique 
“that artifacts are important, and people are not.”
Finally, we are concerned that the maker movement is adopting a narrow 
version of constructionism as its theoretical seed, rather than drawing from 
223
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
critical developments in constructionist theory that include social and cultural 
perspectives. Extending Piaget’s constructivist focus on individual sense mak-
ing and experience, constructionism posits that learners construct understand-
ings of the ideas that are embedded in the creation of personally meaningful 
artifacts (Papert, 1993). For example, the “turtle” in Logo turtle graphics was 
designed to help learners explore geometry by providing ways to think about 
the formation of shapes as processes that they could relate to physically and 
control through creating procedures (Papert, 1980). Early visions for the pos-
sibilities that programming (now “coding”) could offer were as much about 
supporting epistemological pluralism as they were about providing new ways 
to explore disciplinary ideas (diSessa, 2000; Turkle & Papert, 1992). 
Constructionist approaches to learning are foundational to the maker 
movement, as reflected in projects that begin with learners’ interests and the 
historical resonance between the technological tools that are popular in con-
temporary makerspaces (i.e., laser cutters, Arduinos) and the original ideas 
that shaped programmable media for children. It is therefore possible to envi-
sion work with technology in makerspaces as similarly opening up new ways 
of thinking about disciplinary ideas and fostering epistemological pluralism. 
For example, investigations of mathematical ideas could be conducted in 
physical, digital, and fabricated forms, each open-ended enough for person-
alized expression yet structured enough for scaffolding toward specific ideas 
(Hooper & Freed, 2013).
In our view, connecting these dots requires intentional forms of pedagogy. 
Yet, historically, constructionist perspectives have not treated explicit atten-
tion to pedagogy as central to learners’ engagement with new ideas. The role 
of the teacher within constructionist pedagogical designs is generally to facili-
tate engagement with new tools using a process of making projects that reflect 
learners’ interests. Constructionist approaches are often contrasted with 
direct forms of teaching, such as Initiation-Response-Evaluation (IRE) models, 
whereby the teacher asks questions, students give responses, and the teacher 
evaluates those responses (Cazden, 2001). 
However, there are existing threads within constructionist research suggest-
ing that the theory and its application could benefit from a more nuanced 
perspective on the role of direct assistance (Delpit, 1986) and the social organi-
zation of making environments. Hooper (2008) examined the role of cultural 
context and teacher-student interactions in the emergence of computational 
ideas as expressive tools. Critiques of constructionism have also called for 
reexamining the theory’s focus on individual learning. Ideas such as cultural 
constructionism (Hooper, 1998), social constructionism (Shaw, 1995), and 
socioconstructivism (Ackermann, 2010) represent efforts to merge construc-
tionist theory with sociocultural perspectives (Nasir et al., 2006; Rogoff, 2003). 
Treating sociocultural experience and interaction as constitutive of individual 
and collective sense making opens up more nuanced views of pedagogy, includ-
ing moments when explicit forms of teaching are appropriate and generative. 
224
Harvard Educational Review
A sociocultural critique of constructionist practice also helps caution 
against the fetishization of tools such as 3D printers and Arduinos as all that is 
needed for robust and equitable forms of making. As with the pitfalls of tech-
nology use in schools, we worry about designs for makerspaces that may be full 
of tools but void of the rich pedagogical philosophies and practices needed 
to support all students (Philip & Garcia, 2013). There are excellent models 
of programs that have been engaging in making activities with nondominant 
populations, such as the California-based Community Science Workshops and 
Techbridge or Making 4 Change in Michigan and North Carolina. We argue 
that these settings succeed because they prioritize sociocultural contexts and 
nurture the development of social relationships and collective sense making 
as interwoven with the critical appropriation of disciplinary tools and ideas 
(Barton et al., in press).
The Sociopolitical Values of Making 
Finally, the buzzwords associated with making in the US context—“innovation,” 
“STEM workforce development,” and “global competitiveness”—have implica-
tions for teaching and learning. Prominent voices within the US maker move-
ment also tend to describe the artifacts young people make as “products” and 
treat innovation as synonymous with democracy and positive social change.7 
We challenge this assumption and highlight groups both inside and outside 
the United States who are developing alternative visions and frameworks. 
First, scientific experimentation and invention are not politically neutral or 
benign activities (Medin & Bang, 2014). There is a long history of research 
within science and technology studies that examines the role of Western sci-
ence in colonialism, military interventions, and the oppression of communi-
ties of color (Harding, 1993; Nelson, Tu, & Hines, 2001). Yet, the politics of 
technology and innovation—and what they mean for the pedagogical design 
of makerspaces—is largely unexplored within the literature. For example, the 
emphasis on robotics and drone technology is often criticized on the grounds 
that it puts forth a narrow, gendered definition of making with little mention 
of the militaristic and ethical implications of such technologies. In examining 
the relationship between the US military and STEM education, Vossoughi & 
Vakil (in progress) express concern with corporate and military investments 
in making; question narratives that tout innovation yet deemphasize critical 
thinking, social analysis, and the arts; and highlight the voices of makers and 
educators that expressed opposition to partnerships among MakerED, hacker-
spaces, and DARPA. 
In light of this larger context, we argue that there is a need for research on 
making that treats learning as a sociopolitical process (Barton et al., in press; 
Booker, Vossoughi, & Hooper, 2014; Santo, 2013). Existing models for this 
approach include a recent graduate course examining the ethics and social 
impact of design at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab, 
Unpacking Impact: Reflecting as We Make. Oakland’s Youth Radio provides 
225
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
another example; in their research on youth media production, Chávez and 
Soep (2005) argue that “the process of transforming lived and imagined expe-
riences into original expressive works for significant audiences can provide 
a resource for young people to rewrite the stories that are told about them, 
against them or supposedly on their behalf” (p. 410). Rather than beginning 
from a generic principle of youth authorship, a common theme within lit-
erature on making, or treating conventional forms of media production as 
politically neutral, Chávez and Soep consider the pedagogical approaches that 
are most responsive to their students’ sociopolitical realities. The meaning of 
authorship itself therefore shifts to involve explicit attention to the rewriting 
of dominant narratives about youth of color and their communities. 
Second, the conflation of innovation with democracy aligns with the grow-
ing economization of education and of public life more broadly. As reflected 
in the 2015 White House statement on making, educational initiatives are 
increasingly framed as economic initiatives, and US makerspaces often empha-
size the access to tools and technologies needed to pursue individual commer-
cial endeavors.8 Brown (2015) considers what this economization of everyday 
life means for social and relational domains, such as education, writing, 
“Neoliberal rationality disseminates the model of the market to all domains and 
activities—even where money is not an issue—and configures human beings 
exhaustively as market actors” (p. 31). She continues, “every aspect of human 
existence is produced as an entrepreneurial one” (p. 65). 
In seeking out alternatives to this “neoliberal rationality,” we analyzed the 
mission statements of a number of makerspaces, hack labs, and collective arts 
spaces in Latin America.9 In Mexico, CASITA (Autonomous Center for the 
Intercultural Creation of Appropriated Technologies) runs workshops where 
participants repurpose bicycles into pedal-powered machines like blenders 
and other practical tools. Its mission statement reads: “We believe that it is 
important to learn, reproduce and innovate the techniques that are ecologi-
cally prudent, but also socially just, culturally appropriate-able, economically 
accessible and, whenever possible, technically reproducible.”10 Such statements 
highlight the activities that take place, and their benefits to the people who 
participate, over and above descriptions of the physical space and its material 
assets. Un/Loquer, a hackerspace in Medellín, Colombia, describes its mission 
as contributing to the world by “creatively redefining technology”: “We take 
apart and occasionally abuse technologies in search of understanding how 
they work in order to propose and construct devices for new uses. Included 
in un/loquer are empirical scientists, neighborhood inventors, cacharreros 
empedernidos [veteran tinkerers], engalladores de carretas [embellishers of 
horse carriages].”11 Such descriptions draw on the historical practice of repur-
posing available technologies for uses outside intended systems of consumer-
ism (Eglash, 2004), signaling a shift away from corporate interests and toward 
community needs. Although we recognize that there are many groups in the 
United States engaged in parallel efforts, we also believe the mainstream dis-
226
Harvard Educational Review
course of the maker movement has much to learn from the forms of imagina-
tion and political possibility reflected in these statements. 
Drawing from these alternative social visions, as well as from Brown’s cri-
tique, we ask: What kind of political and economic subject is the learner within 
a making environment? To what extent are students in the United States being 
positioned as future workers or entrepreneurs? What alternate identities and 
subjectivities are eclipsed in the process? In our view, the dominant framing 
of making as a STEM-oriented movement—and the vast investment in STEM 
education as opposed to arts, social studies, or literacy education—is, in part, 
a consequence of the organization of all spheres of social life around eco-
nomic returns on investment. While we are excited by the rich intersections 
between scientific and artistic practice, the growing emphasis on STEAM (sci-
ence, technology, engineering, arts, and math) also illustrates the ways arts 
education may be supported in so far as it contributes to scientific and eco-
nomic initiatives. 
Thus, we worry that questions such as “Where is the learning in making?” 
too often become synonymous with “Where is the STEM in making?” This ten-
dency works against a wider range of learning goals and risks overlooking the 
various ways young people experience and value making as a multidisciplinary 
activity (Peppler, 2013; Sheridan et al., 2014). In our research, we have sought 
to move beyond a narrow focus on STEM by foregrounding the multidisci-
plinary development of ideas as interwoven with the development of social 
relations and new forms of agency. This focus allows us to study the genesis 
of diverse forms of learning and how they matter to participants, rather than 
starting from the premise that that learning is bound to STEM or to predeter-
mined definitions of making.
In a similar vein, we notice that groups like Medellín’s Por Estos Dias (these 
days) define themselves as collectives of people who engage in a range of activ-
ities related to making. This multimodal approach, as expressed by Por Estos 
Dias, serves as an opening to the genesis of larger purposes and possibilities 
and resonates with Chachra’s (2015) critique of the pressure to identify as a 
maker:
Hay días que somos un proyecto de acción social 
Algunos días somos un diálogo entre disciplinas 
Día tras día somos un experimento que se reimagina
No todos los días somos un proyecto de arte 
PorEstosDias hacemos cosas
(There are days when we are a cultural action project
Some days we are a dialogue between disciplines . . . 
Day after day we are an experiment that reinvents itself . . .
Not every day we are an art project,
These days we make things.)12
227
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
Drawing inspiration from such statements, we see an expansive potential 
in historical forms of creative activity that are rooted in community and in 
contemporary making practices that are situated within the greater social and 
intellectual purposes of collective transformation.
Conclusion
In this article we examine the tensions we see in the maker movement as a way 
to support collective self-reflection and new forms of action. Currently, mak-
ing is being incorporated at scale in rapid ways without adequately consider-
ing the structural changes and material and pedagogical resources required to 
support learning for all students. We therefore see a crucial need to create the 
time, space, and analytic tools necessary to embrace the complexity of placing 
culture, power, and equity at the center of the design and research of making. 
In this spirit, we propose a framework that highlights four alternative starting 
points for equity-oriented design: critical analyses of educational injustice, his-
toricized approaches to making as cross-cultural activity, explicit attention to 
pedagogy, and inquiry into the sociopolitical values and purposes of making. 
Explicit engagement with these complexities can lead to a critical examina-
tion and iterative reconceptualization of key learning principles and pedago-
gies. We believe pedagogical designs that are animated by these principles will 
be more responsive to the histories, needs, and experiences of working-class 
students and students of color and that related forms of research will help 
theorize the kinds of agentive teaching and learning that can emerge within 
making experiences.
Notes
1. See, for example, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/christine-henseler/the-maker-move-
ment-and-th_b_6349514.html, which contrasts with the more typical representation of 
makerspaces found at http://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/education/edlife/
forward-tinkering-colleges-make-room-for-maker-spaces.html?_r=2&referer=http:// 
m.facebook.com.
2. “Introduction: Mind and Work,” from The Mind at Work: Valuing The Intelligence of the 
American Worker by Mike Rose, copyright © 2004 by Mike Rose. Used with permission of 
Viking Books, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random 
House LLC.
3. The Tinkering Afterschool Program is a partnership between a science museum and an 
afterschool center that serves children and youth from immigrant and diasporic back-
grounds (Mexican, Central American, Chinese, Vietnamese, Filipino/a and African 
American) in a working-class urban community. Adults and teen educators work with 
elementary-aged children on a weekly basis to design and co-create artifacts that blend 
scientific inquiry and artistic expression, such as scribbling machines, stop-motion ani-
mation films, wooden pinball machines, and musical instruments. 
4. We lead with the term injustice because we believe it highlights historical and contem-
porary forms of oppression—and their intentionality—in ways that inequity or disparity 
228
Harvard Educational Review
can sometimes obscure. A justice-oriented frame also opens the space to imagine and 
articulate self-determined solutions that diverge from white, middle-class epistemolo-
gies and practices. 
5. Student names are pseudonyms. In this case, the teacher, Walter (in Vignette 2), chose 
to use his real name. 
6. This vignette is adapted from a description of the same interaction featured in Vos-
soughi and Bevan (2014).
7. As Techshop CEO Mark Hatch (2014) states, “The real power of this revolution is its 
democratizing effects. Now, almost anyone can innovate. Now almost anyone can make. 
Now, with the tools available at a makerspace, anyone can change the world” (p. 10).
8. See https://www.whitehouse.gov/nation-of-makers.
9. We chose to focus on Latin America in order to intentionally step outside the narra-
tive of American exceptionalism, and due to Escudé’s personal connection with Latin 
America as an Argentine who lived and worked there as an artist and teacher for several 
years. The particular focus on Colombian makerspaces is due to a recent professional 
collaboration between Escudé and individuals associated with both the science museum 
Explora and the makerspace Platohedro, through which she became familiar with the very 
active making/hacking community in Colombia.
10. See http://www.cacita.org.mx/.
11. See http://unloquer.org/inicio/. Carretas are homemade wooden carts, often horse-
drawn. They are commonly used in Latin America by independent street vendors or 
collectors of discarded recyclables for resale or reuse.
12.  See https://www.facebook.com/porestos.dias/about?section=bio&pnref=about. This 
mission statement was translated by Escudé. 
References
Ackermann, E. K. (2010, August). Constructivism(s): Shared roots, crossed paths, multiple 
legacies. Proceedings of the Constructionism 2010 Conference, Paris, France, 1–9.
Arieff, A. (2015, April 3). Learning through tinkering. The New York Times. Retrieved 
from http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/04/opinion/learning-through-tinkering 
.html?_r=0
Bang, M., & Medin, D. (2010). Cultural processes in science education: Supporting the nav-
igation of multiple epistemologies. Science Education, 94(6), 1008–1026.
Bang, M., Warren, B., Rosebery, A. S., & Medin, D. (2012). Desettling expectations in sci-
ence education. Human Development, 55(5–6), 302–318.
Barton, A. C., Tan, C., & Greenberg, D. (in press). The makerspace movement: Sites of 
possibilities for equitable opportunities to engage underrepresented youth in STEM. 
Teachers College Record. 
Blikstein, P. (2013). Digital fabrication and “making” in education: The democratization of 
invention. In J. Walter-Herrmann & C. Büching (Eds.), Fablabs: Of machines, makers 
and inventors (pp. 1–21). Bielefeld, Germany: Transcript.
Booker, A., Vossoughi, S., & Hooper, P. (2014, June). Tensions and possibilities for political work 
in the learning sciences. Paper presented to the International Conference of the Learn-
ing Sciences, Boulder, CO. 
Brahms, L. J. (2014). Making as a learning process: Identifying and supporting family learning in 
informal settings. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Pittsburgh. 
Brown, W. (2015). Undoing the demos: Neoliberalism’s stealth revolution. Cambridge, MA: Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
Buechley, L. (2013, October). Thinking about making. Keynote speech presented at FabLearn 
Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 
229
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
Buechley, L., Eisenberg, M., Catchen, J., & Crockett, A. (2008, April). The LilyPad Arduino: 
Using computational textiles to investigate engagement, aesthetics, and diversity in 
computer science education. In M. Czerwinski & A. Lund (Chairs), Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 423–432). New York: Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery.
Calderon, D. (2014). Speaking back to manifest destinies: A land education–based approach 
to critical curriculum inquiry. Environmental Education Research, 20(1), 24–36.
Cazden, C. B. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmouth, 
NH: Heinemann. 
Chachra, D. (2015, January 23). Why I am not a maker. The Atlantic. Retrieved from http://
www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/01/why-i-am-not-a-maker/384767/
Cole, M., & Griffin, P. (1983). A socio-historical approach to re-mediation. Quarterly Newslet-
ter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 5(4), 69–74. 
Danticat, E. (2013, August 27). All immigrants are artists. The Atlantic. Retrieved from 
http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2013/08/all-immigrants- 
are-artists/279087/
Delpit, L. (1986). Skills and other dilemmas of a progressive black educator. Harvard Edu-
cational Review, 56(4), 379–386.
DiGiacomo, D. K., & Gutiérrez, K. D. (2015). Relational equity as a design tool within mak-
ing and tinkering activities. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 00, 1–15.
diSessa, A. A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning, and literacy. Cambridge, MA: Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
Dougherty, D. (2011, January). Dale Dougherty: We are makers [Video file]. Retrieved from 
http://www.ted.com/talks/dale_dougherty_we_are_makers
Dougherty, D. (2012). The maker movement. innovations, 7(3), 11–14.
Eglash, R. (2004). Appropriating technology: An introduction. In R. Eglash, J. L. Croissant, 
G. Di Chiro, & R. Fouché (Eds.), Appropriating technology: Vernacular science and social 
power (pp. vii–xxi). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Elias, M. (2013). The school-to-prison pipeline. Teaching Tolerance, 52(43), 39–40.
Espinoza, M. L., & Vossoughi, S. (2014). Perceiving learning anew: Social interaction, dig-
nity, and educational rights. Harvard Educational Review, 84(3), 285–313.
González, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2005). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practice 
in households, communities, and classrooms. New York: Routledge.
Gutiérrez, K. D. (2008). Developing a sociocritical literacy in the third space. Reading 
Research Quarterly, 43(2), 148–164.
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Jaramillo, N. E. (2006). Looking for educational equity: The conse-
quences of relying on Brown. Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 
105(2), 173–189. 
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or reper-
toires of practice. Educational Researcher, 32(5), 19–25. 
Gutwill, J. P., Hido, N., & Sindorf, L. (2015). Research to practice: Observing learning in 
tinkering activities. Curator: The Museum Journal, 58(2), 151–168.
Halverson, E. R., & Sheridan, K. (2014). The maker movement in education. Harvard Edu-
cational Review, 84(4), 495–504.
Harding, S. (Ed.). (1993). The racial economy of science. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press.
Hatch, M. (2014). The maker movement manifesto. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Honey, M., & Kanter, D. (2013). Design-make-play: Growing the next generation of science innova-
tors. New York: New York Hall of Science. 
Hooper, P. (1998). They have their own thoughts: Children’s learning of computational ideas from 
a cultural constructionist perspective. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Massachussets 
Institute of Technology.
230
Harvard Educational Review
Hooper, P. (2008). Looking BK and moving FD: Toward a sociocultural lens on learning 
with programmable media. In T. McPherson (Ed.), Digital youth, innovation, and the 
unexpected (pp. 123–142). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Press. 
Hooper, P., & Freed, N. (2013). “The Spiro inquiry”: Exploring the application of an inquiry 
structure for learning science content to teaching with a digital design fabrication tool. Paper 
presented at the Digital Fabrication in Education Workshop at IDC, Transformative 
Learning Technologies Lab, Stanford Graduate School of Education, Stanford, CA.
Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, B., Rhodes, J., Salen, K., et al. (2013). Con-
nected learning: An agenda for research and design. Digital Media and Learning Research 
Hub. Retrieved from http://dmlhub.net/wp-content/uploads/files/Connected_
Learning_report.pdf
Kafai, Y., Fields, D., & Searle, K. (2014). Electronic textiles as disruptive designs: Support-
ing and challenging maker activities in schools. Harvard Educational Review, 84(4), 
532–556.
Kafai, Y., Searle, K., Martinez, C., & Brayboy, B. (2014). Ethnocomputing with electronic 
textiles: Culturally responsive open design to broaden participation in computing in 
American Indian youth and communities. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM technical sym-
posium on computer science education (pp. 241–246). New York: Association for Comput-
ing Machinery.
Kohn, A. (2014, April 6). The downside of “grit.” The Washington Post. Retrieved from 
http://www.alfiekohn.org/article/downside-grit/
Lee, C. D. (2001). Is October Brown Chinese? A cultural modeling activity system for under-
achieving students. American Educational Research Journal, 38(1), 97–141.
Maker Media. (n.d.). Leading the Maker Movement. Retrieved from: http://makermedia 
.com/ 
Martin, L. (2015). The promise of the maker movement for education. Journal of Pre-College 
Engineering Education Research (J-PEER), 5(1), 30–39.
Martinez, S. L., & Stager, G. (2013). Invent to learn: Making, tinkering, and engineering in the 
classroom. Torrance, CA: Constructing Modern Knowledge Press.
McDermott, R. (2010). The passions of learning in tight circumstances: Toward a political 
economy of the mind. Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 109(1), 
144–159.
McDermott, R., & Raley, J. (2011). Looking closely: Toward a natural history of human 
ingenuity. In E. Margolis & L. Pauwels (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of visual research 
methods (pp. 372–391). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Medin, D. L., & Bang, M. (2014). Who’s asking? Native science, western science, and science educa-
tion. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
Morozov, E. (2014, January 13). Making it. The New Yorker. Retrieved from http://www.newy-
orker.com/magazine/2014/01/13/making-it-2
Nasir, N. S. (2011). Racialized identities: Race and achievement among African American youth. 
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Nasir, N. S., Rosebery, A. S., Warren, B., & Lee, C. D. (2006). Learning as a cultural process: 
Achieving equity through diversity. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of 
the learning sciences (pp. 489–504). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Nasir, N. & Vakil, S. (in press). STEM-focused Academies in Urban Schools: Tensions and 
Possibilities. Journal of the Learning Sciences. 
Nelson, A., Tu, T. L. N., & Hines, A. H. (2001). Technicolor: Race, technology, and everyday life. 
New York: New York University Press.
Nocon, H., & Cole, M. (2006). School’s invasion of “after-school”: Colonization, rationaliza-
tion or expansion of access? In Z. Bekerman, N. C. Burbules, & D. Silberman-Keller 
231
Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power
shirin vossoughi,  paula k. hooper, and meg escudé
(Eds.), Learning in places: The informal education reader (pp. 99–122). New York: Peter 
Lang.
Norris, A. (2014). Make-her-spaces as hybrid places: Designing and resisting self construc-
tions in urban classrooms. Equity & Excellence in Education, 47(1), 63–77.
Oakes, J. (1999). Limiting students’ school success and life chances: The impact of track-
ing. In A. C. Ornstein, L. S. Behar-Horenstein, & E. F. Pajak (Eds.), Contemporary issues 
in curriculum (2nd ed., pp. 224–237). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1993). The children’s machine: Rethinking school in the age of the computer. New York: 
Basic Books.
Peppler, K. (2013). STEAM-powered computing education: Using e-textiles to integrate the 
arts and STEM. Computer, 46(9), 38–43. 
Petrich, M., Wilkinson, K., & Bevan, B. (2013). It looks like fun, but are they learning? In 
M. Honey & D. Kanter (Eds.), Design, make, play: Growing the next generation of STEM 
innovators (pp. 50–70). New York: Routledge. 
Philip, T., & Garcia, A. (2013). The importance of still teaching the iGeneration: New tech-
nologies and the centrality of pedagogy. Harvard Educational Review, 83(2), 300–319.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Rose, M. (2011). The mismeasure of teaching and learning: How contemporary school 
reform fails the test. Dissent, 58(2), 32–38.
Rose, M. (2014). The mind at work: Valuing the intelligence of the American worker. New York: 
Penguin Books.
Ryoo, J. J., Bulalacao, N., Kekelis, L., McLeod, E., & Henriquez, B. (2015, September). Tin-
kering with “failure”: Equity, learning, and the iterative design process. Paper pre-
sented at the FabLearn Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 
Santo, R. (2013). Towards hacker literacies: What Facebook’s privacy snafus can teach us 
about empowered technological practices. Digital Culture & Education, 5(1), 18–33.
Schwartz, L., & Gutierrez, K. (2015). Literacy studies and situated methods: Exploring the 
social organization of household activity and family media use. In J. Rowsell & K. Pahl 
(Eds.). The Routledge Handbook of Literacy Studies. New York: Routledge.
Shaw, A. (1995). Social constructionism and the inner city: Designing environments for social devel-
opment and urban renewal. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The Media Lab, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Sheridan, K., Halverson, E. R., Litts, B., Brahms, L., Jacobs-Priebe, L., & Owens, T. (2014). 
Learning in the making: A comparative case study of three makerspaces. Harvard 
Educational Review, 84(4), 505–531.
Soep, E., & Chávez, V. (2005). Youth radio and the pedagogy of collegiality. Harvard Educa-
tional Review, 75(4), 409–434. 
Turkle, S., & Papert, S. (1992). Epistemological pluralism and the revaluation of the con-
crete. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Constructionism (pp. 161–192). Westport, CT: 
Ablex.
Vossoughi, S., & Bevan, B. (2014, June). Making and tinkering: A review of the literature. Com-
missioned paper for Successful Out-of-School STEM Learning: A Consensus Study, 
Board on Science Education, National Research Council, Washington, DC. Retrieved 
from http://sites.nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/dbassesite/documents 
/webpage/dbasse_089888.pdf
Vossoughi, S., Escudé, M., Kong, F., & Hooper, P. (2013, October). Tinkering, learning and 
equity in the after-school setting. Paper presented at the annual FabLearn conference, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
232
Harvard Educational Review
Vossoughi, S., & Vakil, S. (in progress). Towards what ends? A critical analysis of militarism 
and STEM education. In T. Buenavista & A. Ali (Eds.), At war: Challenging racism, mate-
rialism, and militarism in education. Manuscript submitted for review.
White House. (2015). A nation of makers. Retrieved from https://www.whitehouse.gov/
nation-of-makers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments
We would like to express our deep appreciation to the following people for their thought-
ful feedback and support of the ideas presented in this paper: Megan Bang, Leah Buech-
ley, Dionne Champion, Manuel Espinoza, Kris Gutiérrez, Leslie Herrenkohl, Susan Jurow, 
Walter Kitundu, Fan Kong, Rebecca Lebowitz, Thomas Philip, Mike Rose, Molly Shea, 
Sepehr Vakil, Max Yurkofsky, and Miguel Zavala. We would also like to thank the anony-
mous reviewer, whose comments were invaluable to the process of revision. 
